DOC Expand on sigmoid and isotonic in calibration.rst (#17725)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/calibration.rst

label, but also obtain a probability of the respective label. This probability
gives you some kind of confidence on the prediction. Some models can give you
poor estimates of the class probabilities and some even do not support

> probability prediction (e.g., :class:`SGDClassifier`). The calibration

Reviewer: you need the whole path unless there's a previous sphinx directive indicating the current module (which wouldn't be sklearn.linear_model anyway)

```suggestion
probability prediction (e.g., :class:`~sklearn.linear_model.SGDClassifier`). The calibration
```

Author: ooohhhh thanks, that is good to know.

> probability prediction (e.g., :class:`~sklearn.linear_model.SGDClassifier`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
probability prediction (e.g., some instances of  :class:`~sklearn.linear_model.SGDClassifier`).
```

> Calibrating a classifier consists in fitting a regressor (called a

Reviewer: consists of

(pretty sure that was from me :s)

*calibrator*) that maps the output of the classifier (as given by

> :term:`decison_function` or :term:`predict_proba`) to a calibrated probability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:term:`decision_function` or :term:`predict_proba`) to a calibrated probability
```

in [0, 1]. Denoting the output of the classifier for a given sample by :math:`f_i`,
the calibrator tries to predict :math:`p(y_i = 1 | f_i)`.

The samples that are used to fit the calibrator should not be the same

> samples used to fit classifier that is to be calibrated, as this would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
samples used to fit the classifier, as this would
```

> introduce bias. Classifier performance on data used to train it would be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
introduce bias. The classifier performance on its training data would be
```

`calibrated_classifiers_` list. The output of :term:`predict` is the class
that has the highest probability.

Alternatively an already fitted classifier can be calibrated by setting
`cv="prefit"`. In this case, the data is not split and all of it is used to
fit the regressor. It is up to the user
make sure that the data used for fitting the classifier is disjoint from the
data used for fitting the regressor.

:class:`CalibratedClassifierCV` supports the use of two 'calibration'

> regressors; 'sigmoid' and 'isotonic'. Both these regressors only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
regressors: 'sigmoid' and 'isotonic'. Both these regressors only
```

support 1-dimensional data (e.g., binary classification output) but are
extended for multiclass classification if the `base_estimator` supports
multiclass predictions. For multiclass predictions,
:class:`CalibratedClassifierCV` calibrates for
each class separately in a :ref:`ovr_classification` fashion [4]_. When
predicting
probabilities, the calibrated probabilities for each class
are predicted separately. As those probabilities do not necessarily sum to
one, a postprocessing is performed to normalize them.

The :func:`sklearn.metrics.brier_score_loss` may be used to evaluate how
well a classifier is calibrated.

Sigmoid
^^^^^^^

The sigmoid regressor is based on Platt's logistic model [3]_:

.. math::
       p(y_i = 1 | f_i) = \frac{1}{1 + \exp(A f_i + B)}

where :math:`y_i` is the true label of sample :math:`i` and :math:`f_i`

> is output of the classifier for sample :math:`i`. :math:`A` and :math:`B`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is the output of the classifier for sample :math:`i`. :math:`A` and :math:`B`
```

are real numbers to be determined when fitting the regressor via maximum
likelihood.

The sigmoid method is biased in that it assumes the :ref:`calibration curve
<calibration_curve>` of the un-calibrated model has a sigmoid shape [1]_. It
is thus most effective when the un-calibrated model is over-confident.

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could also mention the fact that Platt scaling assumes symmetric calibration errors, that is, it assumes that the over-confidence errors for low values of `f_i` have the same magnitude as for high values of `f_i`. This is not necessarily the case for highly imbalanced classification problems where the un-calibrated classifier can have asymmetric calibration errors.

This is just an intuition (I have not run experiments to confirm this happens in practice) though.

Author: You're right it's discussed here: https://projecteuclid.org/download/pdfview_1/euclid.ejs/1513306867

Reviewer 2: Beta calibration looks very nice, I did not know about it. Unfortunately it does not meet the criterion for inclusion in scikit-learn in terms of citations but honestly I wouldn't mind considering a PR to add as a third option to `CalibratedClassifierCV`.

Isotonic
^^^^^^^^

The 'isotonic' method fits a non-parametric isotonic regressor, which outputs
a step-wise non-decreasing function (see :mod:`sklearn.isotonic`). It
minimizes:

.. math::
       \sum_i (y_i - f_i)^2

> subject to :math:`\f_i \le f_j`. This method is more general when compared to

Reviewer: The constraint is y_i < y_j whenever f_i < f_j

Though we should not use y_i: y_i is used before and corresponds to the true target (0 or 1).

Author: I was confused at this part but I think y_i here does mean the true target.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/23182829/85780604-17408a00-b725-11ea-860b-286b3c71bffd.png)

from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4180410/
(sorry for funny screenshot)

Reviewer 2: "subject to :math:`\f_i \le f_j`" is ambiguous as `j` is not defined. I think you should reproduce the full formula you quoted above only using `f_i` / `f_{i+1}` instead of the `\tilde{s}_i` / `\tilde{s}_{i+1}` notation.

> subject to :math:`\f_i \le f_j`. This method is more general when compared to

Reviewer 3: The backslach looks like if we make the character red in the doc

```suggestion
subject to :math:`f_i \le f_j`. This method is more general when compared to
```

fit the regressor. It is up to the user
make sure that the data used for fitting the classifier is disjoint from the
data used for fitting the regressor.

:class:`CalibratedClassifierCV` supports the use of two 'calibration'
regressors: 'sigmoid' and 'isotonic'. Both these regressors only
support 1-dimensional data (e.g., binary classification output) but are
extended for multiclass classification if the `base_estimator` supports
multiclass predictions. For multiclass predictions,
:class:`CalibratedClassifierCV` calibrates for
each class separately in a :ref:`ovr_classification` fashion [4]_. When
predicting
probabilities, the calibrated probabilities for each class
are predicted separately. As those probabilities do not necessarily sum to
one, a postprocessing is performed to normalize them.

The :func:`sklearn.metrics.brier_score_loss` may be used to evaluate how
well a classifier is calibrated.

Sigmoid
^^^^^^^

The sigmoid regressor is based on Platt's logistic model [3]_:

.. math::
       p(y_i = 1 | f_i) = \frac{1}{1 + \exp(A f_i + B)}

where :math:`y_i` is the true label of sample :math:`i` and :math:`f_i`

> is the output of the classifier for sample :math:`i`. :math:`A` and :math:`B`

Reviewer: just to avoid any potential ambiguity

```suggestion
is the output of the un-calibrated classifier for sample :math:`i`. :math:`A` and :math:`B`
```

are real numbers to be determined when fitting the regressor via maximum
likelihood.

The sigmoid method is biased in that it assumes the :ref:`calibration curve
<calibration_curve>` of the un-calibrated model has a sigmoid shape and is
symmetrical [1]_. It is thus most effective when the un-calibrated model is
over-confident and has similar over-confidence errors for both high and low
output errors. The symmetry assumption is of concern in highly imbalanced
classification as un-calibrated classifiers can have asymmetric calibration
errors.

Isotonic
^^^^^^^^

The 'isotonic' method fits a non-parametric isotonic regressor, which outputs
a step-wise non-decreasing function (see :mod:`sklearn.isotonic`). It
minimizes:

.. math::
       \sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - f_i)^2 : f_i \leq f_{i+1}\quad \forall i \{1,..., n-1\}

where :math:`y_i` is the true label of sample :math:`i` and :math:`f_i`

> is the output of the classifier for sample :math:`i`. This method is more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is the calibrated output of the classifier for sample :math:`i`. This method is more
```

Author: ...are you sure? I am confused now

Author: this is the function that is minimized to find the isotonic function, so should be the output of the classifier..?

Reviewer: We're already using `f_i` above to define the output of the un-calibrated classifier.

The formula should be

 \sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{f}_i)^2

where \hat{f} is as @ogrisel suggested (the calibrated probability)

And the constraint is that \hat{f}_i >= \hat{f}_j whenever f_i >= f_j

Reviewer 2: Indeed sorry for the confusion.

The :func:`sklearn.metrics.brier_score_loss` may be used to evaluate how
well a classifier is calibrated.

Sigmoid
^^^^^^^

The sigmoid regressor is based on Platt's logistic model [3]_:

.. math::
       p(y_i = 1 | f_i) = \frac{1}{1 + \exp(A f_i + B)}

where :math:`y_i` is the true label of sample :math:`i` and :math:`f_i`
is the output of the un-calibrated classifier for sample :math:`i`. :math:`A`
and :math:`B` are real numbers to be determined when fitting the regressor via
maximum likelihood.

The sigmoid method is biased in that it assumes the :ref:`calibration curve
<calibration_curve>` of the un-calibrated model has a sigmoid shape and is
symmetrical [1]_. It is thus most effective when the un-calibrated model is
over-confident and has similar over-confidence errors for both high and low
output errors. The symmetry assumption is of concern in highly imbalanced
classification as un-calibrated classifiers can have asymmetric calibration
errors.

Isotonic
^^^^^^^^

The 'isotonic' method fits a non-parametric isotonic regressor, which outputs
a step-wise non-decreasing function (see :mod:`sklearn.isotonic`). It
minimizes:

.. math::
       \sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{f}_i)^2

> subject to \hat{f}_i >= \hat{f}_j whenever f_i >= f_j. :math:`y_i` is the true

Reviewer 2: The math formatting is missing here: https://109917-843222-gh.circle-artifacts.com/0/doc/modules/calibration.html#isotonic

```suggestion
subject to :math`:\hat{f}_i >= \hat{f}_j` whenever :math:`f_i >= f_j`. :math:`y_i` is the true
```

Reviewer 2: This paragraph will probably need to be wrapped. to avoid going beyond 80 chars.

Author: whoops

Reviewer 2: Under vscode, I use https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=stkb.rewrap with the `alt+q` keyboard shortcut for this.

`calibrated_classifiers_` list. The output of :term:`predict` is the class
that has the highest probability.

Alternatively an already fitted classifier can be calibrated by setting
`cv="prefit"`. In this case, the data is not split and all of it is used to
fit the regressor. It is up to the user
make sure that the data used for fitting the classifier is disjoint from the
data used for fitting the regressor.

:class:`CalibratedClassifierCV` supports the use of two 'calibration'

> regressors: 'sigmoid' and 'isotonic'. Both these regressors only

Reviewer: I would put the section about multiclass (from "Both these regressors" to "normalize them") into another subsesction e.g. "Multiclass support", once isotonic and sigmoid calibrators have been describe.

Otherwise the 2 subsections detailing isotonic and sigmoid are a bit abrupt. It would be more natural if they directely followed from ":class:`CalibratedClassifierCV` supports the use of two 'calibration' regressors: 'sigmoid' and 'isotonic'."

We can move the sentence about `brier_score` just before

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, it works much better. I thought it didn't flow well but I wasn't sure how best to change.

extended for multiclass classification if the `base_estimator` supports
multiclass predictions. For multiclass predictions,
:class:`CalibratedClassifierCV` calibrates for
each class separately in a :ref:`ovr_classification` fashion [4]_. When
predicting
probabilities, the calibrated probabilities for each class
are predicted separately. As those probabilities do not necessarily sum to
one, a postprocessing is performed to normalize them.

The :func:`sklearn.metrics.brier_score_loss` may be used to evaluate how
well a classifier is calibrated.

Sigmoid
^^^^^^^

The sigmoid regressor is based on Platt's logistic model [3]_:

.. math::
       p(y_i = 1 | f_i) = \frac{1}{1 + \exp(A f_i + B)}

where :math:`y_i` is the true label of sample :math:`i` and :math:`f_i`
is the output of the un-calibrated classifier for sample :math:`i`. :math:`A`
and :math:`B` are real numbers to be determined when fitting the regressor via
maximum likelihood.

The sigmoid method is biased in that it assumes the :ref:`calibration curve
<calibration_curve>` of the un-calibrated model has a sigmoid shape and is
symmetrical [1]_. It is thus most effective when the un-calibrated model is

> under-confident and has similar errors for both high and low

Reviewer: my understanding is that we assume over-confidence for low probabilities and under-confidence for high probabilities (which are then compensated by the shape of the logistic function)?

also by "similar errors" do we mean errors with similar absolute values / magnitude?

Author: Oh I am confused. I thought that a 'sigmoid' shape of calibration curve meant under-confident classifier and 'transposed-sigmoid' shape meant over-confident model. This is just from the example: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/calibration/plot_calibration_curve.html#sphx-glr-auto-examples-calibration-plot-calibration-curve-py

I think similar errors is in terms of the shape of the calibration curve - the sigmoid is symmetrical in shape. Since we are dealing with difference in predicted probability and frequency of true positives per bin, i would say similar absolute difference?

Reviewer: > my understanding is that we assume over-confidence for low probabilities and under-confidence for high probabilities (which are then compensated by the shape of the logistic function)?

Ok I see how I was wrong here

> Oh I am confused. I thought that a 'sigmoid' shape of calibration curve meant under-confident classifier and 'transposed-sigmoid' shape meant over-confident model. This is just from the example: scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/calibration/plot_calibration_curve.html#sphx-glr-auto-examples-calibration-plot-calibration-curve-py

Now I'm confused too: from the example, it seems to me that NB (with a transposed sigmoid shape) is 
**under** confident, while the LinearSVC (with a sigmoid shape) is **over**confident: for example for the bin at 0.8, its predictions are close to 1, so I interpret this as being over-confident about the positive class. What am I getting wrong? Maybe @ogrisel can chime in?

Author: > rom the example, it seems to me that NB (with a transposed sigmoid shape) is
> **under** confident, while the LinearSVC (with a sigmoid shape) is **over**confident:

Yes you are right! I should have thought about this more. (I think @ogrisel will be on holiday from next week though...)

Reviewer: > What am I getting wrong?

Ok so what I was getting wrong is that I was inverting the axes: the x axis is what the classifiers predicts and the y axis are the actual proportions. So indeed the sigmoid curve describes under-confidence and the example is correct.

Author: Yes, okay. It is tricky to interpret. I guess you have to think about it from 0.5 and go up/down.

output errors. The symmetry assumption is of concern in highly imbalanced
classification as un-calibrated classifiers can have asymmetric calibration
errors.

Isotonic
^^^^^^^^

The 'isotonic' method fits a non-parametric isotonic regressor, which outputs
a step-wise non-decreasing function (see :mod:`sklearn.isotonic`). It
minimizes:

.. math::
       \sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{f}_i)^2

subject to :math:`\hat{f}_i >= \hat{f}_j` whenever
:math:`f_i >= f_j`. :math:`y_i` is the true
label of sample :math:`i` and :math:`\hat{f}_i` is the output of the

> calibrated classifier for sample :math:`i`. This method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
calibrated classifier for sample :math:`i`, i.e. the calibrated probability. This method
```

This is because the Brier score metric is a combination of calibration loss
and refinement loss. Calibration loss is defined as the mean squared deviation
from empirical probabilities derived from the slope of ROC segments.
Refinement loss can be defined as the expected optimal loss as measured by the
area under the optimal cost curve. As refinement loss can change
independently from calibration loss, a lower Brier score does not necessarily
mean a better calibrated model.

:class:`CalibratedClassifierCV` supports the use of two 'calibration'
regressors: 'sigmoid' and 'isotonic'.

Sigmoid
^^^^^^^

The sigmoid regressor is based on Platt's logistic model [3]_:

.. math::
       p(y_i = 1 | f_i) = \frac{1}{1 + \exp(A f_i + B)}

where :math:`y_i` is the true label of sample :math:`i` and :math:`f_i`
is the output of the un-calibrated classifier for sample :math:`i`. :math:`A`
and :math:`B` are real numbers to be determined when fitting the regressor via
maximum likelihood.

The sigmoid method is biased in that it assumes the :ref:`calibration curve
<calibration_curve>` of the un-calibrated model has a sigmoid shape and is

> symmetrical [1]_. It is thus most effective when the un-calibrated model is

Reviewer: I don't want to delay merging further if you're sure about this but there are a few things that aren't clear for me here:

- why does sigmoid calibration assumes a sigmoid calibration curve?
- is this really discussed in [1]_, or rather in projecteuclid.org/download/pdfview_1/euclid.ejs/1513306867? 

In projecteuclid.org/download/pdfview_1/euclid.ejs/1513306867  it is said that

> the parametric assumption made by logistic calibration is exactly the right one if the scores output by a classifier are normally distributed within each class around class means s+ and s− with the same variance σ2

though I'm not sure yet how that relates to the comment made above

Author: The symmetry assumption is discussed in projecteuclid.org/download/pdfview_1/euclid.ejs/1513306867 but not in '`[1]`'. I can add it in.

>     * why does sigmoid calibration assumes a sigmoid calibration curve?

I am not clear on the maths but I think this is explained better in the original Platt paper: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/2594015_Probabilistic_Outputs_for_Support_Vector_Machines_and_Comparisons_to_Regularized_Likelihood_Methods
 section 2.1 (which I can reference instead)

Reviewer: > I am not clear on the maths but I think this is explained better in the original Platt paper

I don't see where this paper says such a thing. What I read is:

- the sigmiod model is equivalent to assuming that the output of the SVM is proportional to the log odds of a positive example
- the class-conditional densities between the margins are apparently exponential. Bayes rules on 2 exponentials suggests using a parametric form of a sigmoid

I don't understand how these two are equivalent to "using a sigmoid calibration assumes that the calibration curve has a sigmoid shape"

Author: Hmm yes that is true. It was designed to calibrate the output of the SVM - which has a sigmoid shape (is this always true)?

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can just say:

- using the sigmoid calibration method assumes that the calibration curve can fixed by applying a sigmoid function on the predictions. This assumption has been empirically justified in the case of support vector machines with common kernel functions on various benchmark datasets in section 2.1 of Platt 2000 [1] but does not necessarily hold in general.
